Intel® Iris® Xe and UHD Graphics Open Source 

Programmer's Reference Manual 

For the 2020-2021 11th Generation Intel Xeon®, Core™, Celeron®, 
Pentium® Gold Processors based on the "Tiger Lake" Platform  

Volume 1: Preface 
  
December 2021, Revision 1.0 

  

     



    

 

Notices and Disclaimers 

Intel technologies may require enabled hardware, software or service activation. 

No product or component can be absolutely secure. 

Code names are used by Intel to identify products, technologies, or services that are in development and 
not publicly available. These are not "commercial" names and not intended to function as trademarks 

Customer is responsible for safety of the overall system, including compliance with applicable safety-
related requirements or standards. 

No license (express or implied, by estoppel or otherwise) to any intellectual property rights is granted by 
this document, with the sole exceptions that a) you may publish an unmodified copy and b) code 
included in this document is licensed subject to Zero-Clause BSD open source license (0BSD). You may 
create software implementations based on this document and in compliance with the foregoing that are 
intended to execute on the Intel product(s) referenced in this document. No rights are granted to create 
modifications or derivatives of this document. 

The products described may contain design defects or errors known as errata which may cause the 
product to deviate from published specifications. Current characterized errata are available on request. 

You may not use or facilitate the use of this document in connection with any infringement or other legal 
analysis concerning Intel products described herein. You agree to grant Intel a non-exclusive, royalty-free 
license to any patent claim thereafter drafted which includes subject matter disclosed herein. 

Intel disclaims all express and implied warranties, including without limitation, the implied warranties of 
merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, and non-infringement, as well as any warranty arising 
from course of performance, course of dealing, or usage in trade. 

Intel may make changes to specifications and product descriptions at any time, without notice. Designers 
must not rely on the absence or characteristics of any features or instructions marked "reserved" or 
"undefined". Intel reserves these for future definition and shall have no responsibility whatsoever for 
conflicts or incompatibilities arising from future changes to them. The information here is subject to 
change without notice. Do not finalize a design with this information. 

© Intel Corporation. Intel, the Intel logo, and other Intel marks are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its 
subsidiaries. Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 

ii    



  
  

 

Table of Contents 

About This Programmer’s Reference Manual .......................................................................... 1 

A Public View of the PRM ..................................................................................................................................... 1 

In Multiple PDF Files ............................................................................................................................................... 1 

Without Cross-book Links .................................................................................................................................... 1 

Searching Across Multiple PDF Files................................................................................................................. 1 

Organization of the Programmer’s Reference Manual ........................................................... 7 

Reserved Bits and Software Compatibility ................................................................................................... 10 

Terminology ............................................................................................................................................................. 11 

 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   iii 



  
  

 

About This Programmer’s Reference Manual 

This Preface serves as an Introduction to the Programmer’s Reference Manual (PRM) for the Graphics 
Processing Unit (GPU) included on the Tiger Lake series of chips. The PRM includes both narrative 
content that explains conceptually how the different modules of the GPU work, and a comprehensive 
Command Reference that describes named memory addresses/registers, commands, structures and 
enumerations, at the bit-level. 

A Public View of the PRM 

For each major chip series, Intel publicly releases a version of the PRM for the Open Source development 
community and developers at large.  For those releases, we release the PRM in Portable Document 
Format (PDF). 

In Multiple PDF Files 

Due to file size constraints in generating PDF output (the Tiger Lake “Open Source” version of the PRM is 
roughly 5,000 pages long), the PRM is generated in multiple PDF files.  The organization of those files 
reflects the major components of the Tiger Lake GPU. Both the narrative content and the Command 
Reference had to be partitioned into multiple PDF files. 

Without Cross-book Links 

Cross-book hyperlinks could not reasonably be included for the PDF.  Instead, those links have been 
disabled and colored dark red and display in a serif font for easy recognition.  This is an example: 

RING_BUFFER_TAIL – Ring Buffer Tail 
RING_BUFFER_HEAD – Ring Buffer Head 

Searching Across Multiple PDF Files 

You can quickly access the detailed explanation for each named memory address, command, structure or 
enumerator utilizing the Advanced Search capabilities in Acrobat Reader.   

To maximize the efficiency of the search, make sure to place all PRM PDFs in a single folder, or at least 
the four Command Reference PDFs in a single folder. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   1 



    

 

Let’s walk through an example PDF search, you might be reading the Command Stream Programming 
module PDF file and encounter the page illustrated below. 

 

To view the detailed explanation of one of the listed registers, for this example, we will use 
RING_BUFFER_TAIL …  

1. Simply select Search or Advanced Search from the Edit menu, depending on the version of 
Acrobat you might be using. (If you are using some other PDF Reader, it probably will also have 
advanced search capabilities.) 

2   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

A search dialog box then displays. 

 

2. Select the All PDF Documents in radio button, click the pull-down list box, then select Browse 
for Location… 
 

 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   3 



    

 

3. Browse to and select the folder containing the pertinent PDF files and click OK. 
 

 

4. The Browse for Folder dialog closes and the focus shifts back to the original Search dialog.  Enter 
the word or phrase from the red, serif text in the What word or phrase would you like to 
search for? text box and click Search. 
 

 

4   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

As matches are found, they will be listed. When the search is complete, the dialog will appear 
similar to the following: 
 

 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   5 



    

 

 

Click the most relevant result and the PDF file containing that result will open at the correct page. 

 

  

6   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

Organization of the Programmer’s Reference Manual 

The Intel(R) Graphics PRM is organized into the following content areas: 

Command Reference provides a tabular graphical interface tool for searching for and displaying 
command opcodes, registers, structures, and instructions. 

GPU Overview introduces the GPU and its subsystems. This includes high level descriptions of its 
hardware pipelines, command formats, register maps, and supported memory/surface formats. 

Configurations tracks the evolution of the graphics architecture and provides generational information 
for many basic architectural attributes. 

Memory Views covers the Graphics Memory Interface, including memory interface functions, tiling, the 
physical graphics memory, page faults and error handling, memory types, common video and non-video 
surface formats, and other information related to the memory interface. 

The GuC micro-controller is a scheduler for the graphics engines. This section describes the following GuC register 
functions:  

Functions 

Interrupt register functions 

DMA register functions 

Shim register functions 

Command Stream Programming describes the programming interfaces for Command Streamer, which 
manages the use of the 3D and Media pipelines. It performs switching between pipelines and forwarding 
command streams to the currently active pipeline. It also manages the allocation of the Unified Return 
Buffer (URB) and helps support the Constant URB Entry (CURBE) function. It includes the following topics: 

Topic 

Command Formats 

Blitter Engine Command Interface 

Render Engine Command Interface 

Video Codec Engine Command Interface 

Video Enhancement Engine Command Interface 

Preemption 

Command Streamer (CS) ALU Programming 

Resource Streamer 

Media describes the VDBOX, VEBOX, VDENC engines and registers. Also covered are HEVC, HCP and 
SFC. 

Topic 

Media VDBOX covers the Multi-Format Codec (MFX) Engine, the hardware fixed-function 
pipeline that includes both multi-format decoding (MFD) and multi-format encoding (MFC). 

Media VEBOX discusses the Video Enhancement pipeline, an independent pipe that manages 
image enhancement functions. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   7 



    

 

Topic 

 Topics include denoise filtering, deinterlacing, color processing, auto contrast enhancement, the 
capture pipe, output statistics, and video enhancement engine functions. 

Media VDENC is the VDBOX Fixed Function Encode Engine. It is a dedicated encoder that does 
not depend on Execution Units and the Video Motion Estimation engine for motion estimation 
and mode decisions. This saves bandwidth and power and provides an independent encode 
pipeline that can be better managed for Quality of Service features. The primary usage will be 
low power video conferencing and video capture. This engine supports the AVC codec for 
encoding video with resolutions up to 3840x2160 in real-time. 

HEVC covers the High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) Codec Pipeline (HCP), which is a fixed 
function hardware video codec pipeline responsible for encoding and decoding HEVC streams, 
with a target resolution of 4kx2k at 60 frames per second. 

3D/GPGPU Engine includes the following topics: 

• Command stream backend processing 

• L3 cache 

• Shared Local Memory (SLM) 

• Messaging 

• Shared functions for the 3D pipeline 

• 3D fixed functions 

• GPGPU Pipeline processing via both fixed functions and programmable GPU cores 

• Execution units 

Blitter discusses the BLock Image Transferer Engine for 2D graphics processing. 

Display describes display engine registers, including display HD audio configuration and programming. 
It includes VGA and extended VGA registers, CPU display registers, North display engine registers, and 
South display engine registers. The Display section explains audio codec verbs, display audio 
configuration registers, and the display audio controller registers. 

Topic 

Wireless Display (WIDI) covers the Wireless Display engine (WDBOX), a dedicated AVC 
video encoder. This section discusses the use of state parameters and lists the MMIO 
registers used for wireless display. 

PCIE Config Registers lists the registers used for Peripheral Component Interconnect 
Express (PCIE) functions, including device identification and enabling, power management 
capabilities, per-thread and per-core status. 

The PCIE Config Registers also include the UNCORE registers. 

Memory Mapped I/O (MMIO) includes information on: 

• Slice Registers and Die Recovery 

SFC discusses the commands sent to the Scalar and Format Converter (SFC) pipeline 
from the Media VEBOX and Media VDBOX. 

8   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

Topic 

Workarounds provides software workarounds for known issues with the GPU. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   9 



    

 

Reserved Bits and Software Compatibility 

In many register, instruction, and memory layout descriptions, certain bits are marked as "Reserved." 
When bits are marked as reserved, it is essential for compatibility with future devices that the software 
treat these bits as having a future, though unknown, effect. The behavior of reserved bits should be 
regarded as undefined and unpredictable. Software should follow the guidelines listed below in dealing 
with reserved bits: 

1. Do not depend on the states of any reserved bits when testing values of registers that contain such 
bits. 

2. Mask out the reserved bits before testing. 

3. Do not depend on the states of any reserved bits when storing to an instruction or to a register. 

4. When loading a register or formatting an instruction, always load the reserved bits with the values 
indicated in the documentation (if any), or reload them with the values previously read from the 
register. 

10   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

Terminology 

Term Abbr. Definition 

Adjacency -- One can consider a single line object as existing in a strip of connected 
lines. The neighboring line objects are called "adjacent objects", with the 
non-shared endpoints called the "adjacent vertices." The same concept can 
be applied to a single triangle object, considering it as existing in a mesh of 
connected triangles. Each triangle shares edges with three other adjacent 
triangles, each defined by a non-shared adjacent vertex. Knowledge of 
these adjacent objects/vertices is required by some object processing 
algorithms (e.g., silhouette edge detection). See 3D Pipeline. 

Application IP AIP Application Instruction Pointer. This is part of the control registers for 
exception handling for a thread. Upon an exception, hardware moves the 
current IP into this register and then jumps to System Instruction Pointer 
(SIP). 

Architectural Register File ARF A collection of architecturally visible registers for a thread such as address 
registers, accumulator, flags, notification registers, IP, null, etc. 

Binding Table -- Memory-resident list of pointers to surface state blocks (also in memory). 

Binding Table Pointer BTP Pointer to a binding table, specified as an offset from the Surface State 
Base Address register. 

Blitter BLT Block Image Transferrer 

Bypass Mode -- Mode where a given fixed function (FF) unit is disabled and forwards data 
down the pipeline unchanged. Not supported by all FF units. 

Byte B A numerical data type of 8 bits, B represents a signed byte integer. 

Child Thread -- A branch-node or a leaf-node thread that is created by another thread. It is 
a kind of thread associated with the media fixed function pipeline. A child 
thread is originated from a thread (the parent) executing on an EU and 
forwarded to the Thread Dispatcher by the TS unit. A child thread may or 
may not have child threads depending on whether it is a branch-node or a 
leaf-node thread. All pre-allocated resources such as URB and scratch 
memory for a child thread are managed by its parent thread. See also 
Parent Thread. 

Clip Space -- A 4-dimensional coordinate system within which a clipping frustum is 
defined. Object positions are projected from Clip Space to NDC space via 
"perspective divide" by the W coordinate, and then viewport mapped into 
Screen Space. 

Clipper -- 3D fixed function unit that removes invisible portions of the drawing 
sequence by discarding (culling) primitives or by "replacing" primitives with 
one or more primitives that replicate only the visible portion of the original 
primitive. 

Color Calculator CC Part of the Data Port shared function, the color calculator performs fixed-
function pixel operations (e.g., blending) before writing a result pixel into 
the render cache. 

Command -- Directive fetched from a ring buffer in memory by the Command Streamer 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   11 



    

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

and routed down a pipeline. Should not be confused with instructions 
which are fetched by the instruction cache subsystem and executed on an 
EU. 

Command Streamer CS or CSI Functional unit of the Graphics Processing Engine that fetches commands, 
parses them, and routes them to the appropriate pipeline. 

Constant URB Entry CURBE A UE that contains "constant" data for use by various stages of the pipeline. 

Control Register CR The read-write registers are used for thread mode control and exception 
handling for a thread. 

Data Port DP Shared function unit that performs a majority of the memory access types. 
The Data Port contains the render cache and the constant cache and 
performs all memory accesses requested by programs except those 
performed by the Sampler. See the DataPort section. 

Degenerate Object -- Object that is invisible due to coincident vertices or because it does not 
intersect any sample points (usually due to being tiny or a very thin sliver). 

Destination -- Describes an output or write operand. 

Destination Size -- The number of data elements in the destination of a SIMD instruction. 

Destination Width -- The size of each of (possibly) many elements of the destination of a SIMD 
instruction. 

Domain Shader DS An API-supplied program that shades vertices using domain points. Also 
refers to the FF unit that dispatches threads to "shade" (calculate attributes 
for) vertices based on domain points. 

Double Quad word DQ A fundamental data type, DQ represents 16 bytes. 
(DQword) 

Double word (DWord) D or DW A fundamental data type, D or DW represents 4 bytes. 

Drawing Rectangle -- A screen-space rectangle within which 3D primitives are rendered. An 
object's screen-space positions are relative to the Drawing Rectangle 
origin. See Strips and Fans. 

Dual Sub-slice DSS The collection of Execution Units (EU) that have a common set of shared 
function units, such as sampler, dataport, and pixel port. 

End of Block EOB A 1-bit flag in the non-zero DCT coefficient data structure indicating the 
end of an 8x8 block in a DCT coefficient data buffer. 

End Of Thread EOT A message sideband signal on the Output message bus signifying that the 
message requester thread is terminated. A thread must have at least one 
SEND instruction with the EOT bit in the message descriptor field set to 
properly terminate. 

Exception -- Type of (normally rare) interruption to EU execution of a thread's 
instructions. An exception occurrence causes the EU thread to begin 
executing the System Routine, which is designed to handle exceptions. 

Execution Channel -- Single lane of a SIMD operand. 

Execution Size ExecSize Execution Size indicates the number of data elements processed by an 
SIMD instruction. It is one of the instruction fields and can be changed per 
instruction. 

12   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

Execution Unit EU An EU is a multi-threaded processor within the multi-processor system. 
Each EU is a fully-capable processor containing instruction fetch and 
decode, register files, source operand swizzle and SIMD ALU, etc.  

Execution Unit Identifier EUID The 4-bit field within a thread state register (SR0) that identifies the row 
and column location of the EU where a thread is located. A thread can be 
uniquely identified by the EUID and TID. 

Execution Width ExecWidth The width of each of several data elements that may be processed by a 
single SIMD instruction. 

Fixed Function FF Function of the pipeline that is performed by dedicated (vs. programmable) 
hardware. 

Fixed Function ID FFID Unique identifier for a fixed function unit. 

Gateway GW See Message Gateway. 

General Register File GRF Large read/write register file shared by all the EUs for operand sources and 
destinations. This is the most commonly used read-write register space 
organized as an array of 256-bit registers for a thread. 

General State Base -- The Graphics Address of a block of memory-resident "state data", which 
Address includes state blocks, scratch space, constant buffers, and kernel programs. 

The contents of this memory block are referenced via offsets from the 
contents of the General State Base Address register. See Graphics 
Processing Engine.  

Geometry Shader GS Fixed-function unit between the vertex shader and the clipper that (if 
enabled) dispatches "geometry shader" threads on its input primitives. 
Application-supplied geometry shaders normally expand each input 
primitive into several output primitives to perform 3D modeling algorithms 
such as fur/fins. 

Graphics Address -- The GPE virtual address of some memory-resident object. This virtual 
address gets mapped by a GTT or PGTT to a physical memory address. 
Note that many memory-resident objects are referenced not with Graphics 
Addresses, but instead with offsets from a "base address register". 

Graphics Processing GPE Collective name for the Subsystem, the 3D and Media pipelines, and the 
Engine Command Streamer. 

Guardband GB Region that may be clipped against to make sure objects do not exceed 
the limitations of the renderer's coordinate space. 

Horizontal Stride HorzStride The distance in element-sized units between adjacent elements of a 
region-based GRF access. 

Immediate floating point VF A numerical data type of 32 bits, an immediate floating point vector of type 
vector VF contains 4 floating point elements with 8 bits each. The 8-bit floating 

point element contains a sign field, a 3-bit exponent field and a 4-bit 
mantissa field. It may be used to specify the type of an immediate operand 
in an instruction. 

Immediate integer vector V A numerical data type of 32 bits, an immediate integer vector of type V 
contains 8 signed integer elements with 4 bits each. The 4-bit integer 
element is in 2's complement form. It may be used to specify the type of an 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   13 



    

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

immediate operand in an instruction. 

Index Buffer IB Buffer in memory containing vertex indices. 

Intel Architecture IA  

Instance -- In the context of the VF unit, an instance is one of a sequence of sets of 
similar primitive data. Each set has identical vertex data but may have 
unique instance data that differentiates it from other sets in the sequence. 

Instruction -- Data in memory directing an EU operation. Instructions are fetched from 
memory, stored in a cache, and executed on one or more cores. Not to be 
confused with commands which are fetched and parsed by the command 
streamer and dispatched down the 3D or Media pipeline. 

Instruction Pointer IP The address (really an offset) of the instruction currently being fetched by 
an EU. Each EU has its own IP. 

Instruction Set ISA The ISA describes the instructions supported by an EU. 
Architecture 

Instruction State Cache ISC On-chip memory that holds recently-used instructions and state variable 
values. 

Interface Descriptor -- Media analog of a State Descriptor. 

Intermediate Z IZ Completion of the Z (depth) test at the front end of the Windower/Masker 
unit when certain conditions are met (no alpha, no pixel-shader computed 
Z values, etc.). 

Inverse Discrete Cosine IDCT The stage in the video decoding pipe between IQ and MC. 
Transform 

Inverse Quantization IQ A stage in the video decoding pipe between IS and IDCT. 

JIT -- Just-in-time compiler, aka "jitter". 

Kernel -- A sequence of instructions that is logically part of the driver or generated 
by the jitter. Differentiated from a Shader which is an application supplied 
program that is translated by the jitter to instructions. 

Logical Ring Context Area LRCA Memory area used to store contents of registers and state information 
required for initiating and resuming communication between software 
application and hardware graphics pipeline via Ring Buffers. 

Least Significant Bit LSB The bit with the lowest bit position within a group of bits, which could be a 
bit group, DWord, field, instruction, memory range, register, or structure. 
For example, bit 0 of a DWord. 

MathBox -- See Extended Math Unit 

Media -- Term for operations such as video decode and encode that are normally 
performed by the Media pipeline. 

Media Pipeline -- Fixed function stages dedicated to media and "generic" processing, 
sometimes referred to as the generic pipeline. 

Memory-mapped MMIO A methord for performing input/output between the CPU/GPU and 
Input/Output peripheral devices. 

Message -- Messages are data packages transmitted from a thread to another thread, 

14   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

another shared function, or another fixed function. Message passing is the 
primary communication mechanism of the architecture. 

Message Gateway -- Shared function that enables thread-to-thread message 
communication/synchronization, used solely by the Media pipeline. 

Most Significant Bit MSB The bit with the highest bit position within a group of bits, which could be 
a bit group, DWord, field, instruction, memory range, register, or structure. 
For example, bit 31 of a DWord. 

Motion Compensation MC Part of the video decoding pipe. 

Motion Picture Expert MPEG MPEG is the international standard body JTC1/SC29/WG11 under ISO/IEC 
Group that has defined audio and video compression standards such as MPEG-1, 

MPEG-2, and MPEG-4. 

Motion Vector Field MVFS A four-bit field selecting reference fields for the motion vectors of the 
Selection current macroblock. 

Multiple Render Targets MRT Multiple independent surfaces that may be the target of a sequence of 3D 
or Media commands that use the same surface state. 

Normalized Device NDC Clip Space Coordinates that have been divided by the Clip Space "W" 
Coordinates component. 

Object -- A single triangle, line, or point. 

OpenGL OGL Open Graphics Library. A graphics API specification associated with Linux. 

Parent Thread -- A thread corresponding to a root-node or a branch-node in thread 
generation hierarchy. A parent thread may be a root thread or a child 
thread depending on its position in the thread generation hierarchy. 

Pipeline Stage -- An abstracted element of the 3D Pipeline, providing functions performed 
by a combination of the corresponding hardware FF unit and the threads 
spawned by that FF unit. 

Pipelined State Pointers PSP Pointers to state blocks in memory that are passed down the pipeline. 

Pixel Shader PS Shader that is supplied by the application, translated by the jitter and is 
dispatched to the EU by the Windower (conceptually) once per pixel. 

Point -- A drawing object characterized only by position coordinates and width. 

Primitive -- Synonym for object: triangle, rectangle, line, or point. 

Primitive Topology -- A composite primitive such as a triangle strip or a line list. Also includes the 
objects triangle, line, and point as degenerate cases. 

Provoking Vertex -- The vertex of a primitive topology from which vertex attributes that are 
constant across the primitive are taken. 

Quad Quad word QQ A fundamental data type, QQ represents 32 bytes. 
(QQword) 

Quad Word (QWord) QW A fundamental data type, QW represents 8 bytes. 

Rasterization -- Conversion of an object represented by vertices into the set of pixels that 
make up the object. 

Region-based addressing -- Collective term for the register addressing modes available in the EU 
instruction set that permit discontiguous register data to be fetched and 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   15 



    

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

used as a single operand. 

Render Cache RC Cache in which pixel color and depth information is written before being 
written to memory, and where prior pixel destination attributes are read in 
preparation for blending and Z test. 

Render Target RT A destination surface in memory where render results are written. 

Render Target Array Index -- Selector of which of several render targets the current operation is 
targeting. 

Resource Streamer RS Functional unit of the Graphics Processing Engine that examines the 
commands in the ring buffer in an attempt to pre-process certain long 
latency items for the remainder of the graphics processing. 

Root Thread -- A root-node thread. A thread corresponds to a root-node in a thread 
generation hierarchy. It is a kind of thread associated with the media fixed 
function pipeline. A root thread is originated from the VFE unit and 
forwarded to the Thread Dispatcher by the TS unit. A root thread may or 
may not have child threads. A root thread may have scratch memory 
managed by TS. A root thread with children has its URB resource managed 
by the VFE. 

Sampler -- Shared function that samples textures and reads data from buffers on 
behalf of EU programs. 

Scratch Space -- Memory allocated to the subsystem that is used by EU threads for data 
storage that exceeds their register allocation, persistent storage, storage of 
mask stack entries beyond the first 16, etc. 

Shader -- A program supplied by the application in a high level shader language, and 
translated to instructions by the jitter. 

Shared Function SF Function unit that is shared by EUs. EUs send messages to shared functions, 
that consume the data and may return results. Example Sampler and Data 
Port. 

Shared Function ID SFID Unique identifier used by kernels and shaders to target shared functions 
and to identify their returned messages. 

Single Instruction Multiple SIMD A parallel processing architecture that exploits data parallelism at the 
Data instruction level. It can also be used to describe the instructions in such an 

architecture or to describe the amount of data parallelism in a particular 
instruction (SIMD8 for example). 

Source -- Describes an input or read operand. 

Spawn -- To initiate a thread for execution on an EU. Done by the thread spawner as 
well as most FF units in the 3D Pipeline. 

Sprite Point -- Point object using full range texture coordinates. Points that are not sprite 
points use the texture coordinates of the point's center across the entire 
point object. 

State Descriptor -- Blocks in memory that describe the state associated with a particular FF, 
including its associated kernel pointer, kernel resource allowances, and a 
pointer to its surface state. 

16   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

State Register SR The read-only registers containing the state information of the current 
thread, including the EUID/TID, Dispatcher Mask, and System IP. 

State Variable SV An individual state element that can be varied to change the way given 
primitives are rendered or media objects processed. On state variables 
persist only in memory and are cached as needed by rendering/processing 
operations except for a small amount of non-pipelined state. 

Stream Output -- A term for writing the output of a FF unit directly to a memory buffer 
instead of, or in addition to, the output passing to the next FF unit in the 
pipeline. Currently only supported for the Geometry Shader (GS) FF unit. 

Strips and Fans SF Fixed function unit whose main function is to decompose primitive 
topologies such as strips and fans into primitives or objects. 

Sub-Register -- Subfield of a SIMD register. A SIMD register is an aligned fixed size register 
for a register file or a register type. For example, a GRF register, r2, is a 256-
bits wide, 256-bit aligned register. A sub-register, r2.3:d, is the fourth 
dword of GRF register r2. 

Subsystem -- The name given to the resources shared by the FF units, including shared 
functions and EUs. 

Surface -- A rendering operand or destination, including textures, buffers, and render 
targets. 

Surface State Base Pointer -- Base address used when referencing binding table and surface state data. 

Synchronized Root Thread -- A root thread that is dispatched by TS upon a 'dispatch root thread' 
message. 

System IP SIP There is one global System IP register for all the threads. From a thread's 
point of view, this is a virtual read only register. Upon an exception, 
hardware performs some bookkeeping and then jumps to SIP. 

System Routine -- Sequence of instructions that handles exceptions. SIP is programmed to 
point to this routine, and all threads encountering an exception will call it. 

Thread -- An instance of a kernel program executed on an EU. The life cycle for a 
thread starts from the executing the first instruction after being dispatched 
from Thread Dispatcher to an EU to the execution of the last instruction - a 
send instruction with EOT that signals the thread termination. Threads in 
the system may be independent from each other or communicate with 
each other through Message Gateway share function. 

Thread Dispatcher TD, TDL Functional unit that arbitrates thread initiation requests from Fixed 
Functions units and instantiates the threads on EUs. 

Thread Identifier TID The field within a thread state register (SR0) that identifies which thread 
slots on an EU a thread occupies. A thread can be uniquely identified by 
the EUID and TID. 

Thread Payload -- Before a thread starting execution, some amount of data is pre-loaded into 
the thread's GRF (starting at r0). This data is typically a combination of 
control information provided by the spawning entity (FF Unit) and data 
read from the URB. 

Thread Spawner TS The second and the last fixed function stage of the media pipeline that 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   17 



    

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

initiates new threads on behalf of generic/media processing. 

Topology -- See Primitive Topology. 

Unified Return Buffer URB The on-chip memory managed/shared by Fixed Functions in order for a 
thread to return data that will be consumed either by a Fixed Function or 
other threads. 

Unsigned Byte integer UB A numerical data type of 8 bits. 

Unsigned Double Word UD A numerical data type of 32 bits. It may be used to specify the type of an 
integer operand in an instruction. 

Unsigned Word integer UW A numerical data type of 16 bits. It may be used to specify the type of an 
operand in an instruction. 

Unsynchronized Root -- A root thread that is automatically dispatched by TS. 
Thread 

URB Dereference --  

URB Entry UE URB Entry: A logical entity stored in the URB (such as a vertex), referenced 
via a URB Handle. 

URB Entry Allocation Size -- Number of URB entries allocated to a Fixed Function unit. 

URB Fence Fence Virtual, movable boundaries between the URB regions owned by each FF 
unit. 

URB Handle -- A unique identifier for an URB entry that is passed down a pipeline. 

URB Reference --  

Variable Length Decode VLD 
The first stage of the video decoding pipe that consists mainly of bit-wide 
operations. 

Vertex Buffer VB Buffer in memory containing vertex attributes. 

Vertex Cache VC Cache of Vertex URB Entry (VUE) handles tagged with vertex indices. See 
the VS chapter for details on this cache. 

Vertex Fetcher VF The first FF unit in the 3D Pipeline responsible for fetching vertex data from 
memory. Sometimes referred to as the Vertex Formatter. 

Vertex Header -- Vertex data required for every vertex appearing at the beginning of a 
Vertex URB Entry. 

Vertex ID -- Unique ID for each vertex that can optionally be included in vertex attribute 
data sent down the pipeline and used by kernel/shader threads. 

Vertex Shader VS An API-supplied program that calculates vertex attributes. Also refers to the 
FF unit that dispatches threads to "shade" (calculate attributes for) vertices. 

Vertex URB Entry VUE An URB entry that contains data for a specific vertex. 

Vertical Stride VertStride The distance in element-sized units between 2 vertically-adjacent elements 
of a region-based GRF access. 

Video Front End VFE The first fixed function in the generic pipeline; performs fixed-function 
media operations. 

Viewport VP  

18   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21 



  
  

 

Term Abbr. Definition 

Windower IZ WIZ Term for Windower/Masker that encapsulates its early ("intermediate") 
depth test function. 

Windower/Masker WM Fixed function triangle/line rasterizer. 

Word W A numerical data type of 16 bits, W represents a signed word integer. 

 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 1-12.21   19