Intel® Iris® Xe and UHD Graphics Open Source 

Programmer's Reference Manual 

For the 2020-2021 11th Generation Intel Xeon®, Core™, Celeron®, 
Pentium® Gold Processors based on the "Tiger Lake" Platform  

Volume 10: Copy Engine  
  
December 2021, Revision 1.0 

  

      



    

 

Notices and Disclaimers 

Intel technologies may require enabled hardware, software or service activation. 

No product or component can be absolutely secure. 

Code names are used by Intel to identify products, technologies, or services that are in development and 
not publicly available. These are not "commercial" names and not intended to function as trademarks 

Customer is responsible for safety of the overall system, including compliance with applicable safety-
related requirements or standards. 

No license (express or implied, by estoppel or otherwise) to any intellectual property rights is granted by 
this document, with the sole exceptions that a) you may publish an unmodified copy and b) code 
included in this document is licensed subject to Zero-Clause BSD open source license (0BSD). You may 
create software implementations based on this document and in compliance with the foregoing that are 
intended to execute on the Intel product(s) referenced in this document. No rights are granted to create 
modifications or derivatives of this document. 

The products described may contain design defects or errors known as errata which may cause the 
product to deviate from published specifications. Current characterized errata are available on request. 

You may not use or facilitate the use of this document in connection with any infringement or other legal 
analysis concerning Intel products described herein. You agree to grant Intel a non-exclusive, royalty-free 
license to any patent claim thereafter drafted which includes subject matter disclosed herein. 

Intel disclaims all express and implied warranties, including without limitation, the implied warranties of 
merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose, and non-infringement, as well as any warranty arising 
from course of performance, course of dealing, or usage in trade. 

Intel may make changes to specifications and product descriptions at any time, without notice. Designers 
must not rely on the absence or characteristics of any features or instructions marked "reserved" or 
"undefined". Intel reserves these for future definition and shall have no responsibility whatsoever for 
conflicts or incompatibilities arising from future changes to them. The information here is subject to 
change without notice. Do not finalize a design with this information. 

© Intel Corporation. Intel, the Intel logo, and other Intel marks are trademarks of Intel Corporation or its 
subsidiaries. Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others. 

ii   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Table of Contents 

Copy Engine ............................................................................................................................... 1 

Blitter (BLT) Command Streamer ....................................................................................................................... 1 

Blitter Engine Command Streamer (BCS) ................................................................................................... 1 

Software Control Bit Definitions .................................................................................................................... 7 

Registers for Blitter Engine Command Streamer .................................................................................... 7 

BLT Engine................................................................................................................................................................... 8 

Classical BLT Engine Functional Description ............................................................................................. 8 

Fast Copy Engine ............................................................................................................................................... 35 

BLT Instruction Overview ................................................................................................................................ 36 

BLT Engine State ................................................................................................................................................ 36 

Device Cache Coherency: Render & Texture Caches .......................................................................... 37 

Verbatim Copy operation ............................................................................................................................... 37 

BLT Engine Instructions ................................................................................................................................... 38 

2D (XY) BLT Instructions .................................................................................................................................. 40 

BLT Engine Instruction Field Definitions ................................................................................................... 44 

 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21     iii 



  
  

 

Copy Engine  

Copy Engine or BLT Engine is an engine that runs in parallel with Render Engine, Compute Engine and 
Media Engine. It is capable of moving blocks of data from one location (source) in the memory to 
another location (destination) in the memory. It can also fill up a specified location in the memory with 
fixed data. Copy Engine can perform pre-defined logical or bitwise operation on source, destination and 
another fixed data called pattern data and write to the destination confined by a clip rectangle. Copy 
Engine can be divided into two categories:  

1. Classical BLT Engine - Can perform basic Copy and Fill operations as well as bit-wise operations. It 
is low performance. 

2. Fast Copy Engine - performs basic copy and fill operations. It is high performance. It can also 
support compute specific copy operations other than the regular 2D operations. 

Fast Copy Engine supports only few  high performance commands, whereas Classical BLT Engine, which 
is also known as Legacy Blitter, supports all others command, including some very complex commands 
involving bit-wise/logical operations. 

Blitter (BLT) Command Streamer  

Blitter Command Streamer is the BLT engine command streamer where scheduler submits workloads for 
the BLT engine. Blitter Command streamer supports execution of the generic functions plus BLT engine 
commands. Each BLT Engine has its own independent command streamer. 

Blitter Engine Command Streamer (BCS) 

The BCS (Blitter Command Streamer) unit primarily serves as the software programming interface 
between the O/S driver and the Blitter Engine. It is responsible for fetching, decoding, and dispatching of 
data packets (Blitter Commands) to the front-end interface module of Blitter Engine. 

Logic Functions Included 

• MMIO register programming interface. 

• DMA action for fetching of ring data from 
memory. 

• Management of the Head pointer for the Ring 
Buffer. 

• Decode of ring data and sending it to the blit 
engine. 

• Handling of user interrupts. 

• Flushing the Blitter Engine. 

• Handle NOP. 

• DMA action for fetching of execlists from memory. 

• Handling of ring context switch interrupt. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   1 



    

 

The BCS unit only claims memory mapped I/O cycles that are targeted to its range of 0x22000 to 
0x224FF. The Blitter, Render and Media Engines use semaphore to synchronize their operations. 

BCS operates completely independent of the other render and media command streams. 

The simple sequence of events is as follows: a ring (say PRB0) is programmed by a memory-mapped 
register write cycle. The DMA inside BCS is kicked off. The DMA fetches commands from memory based 
on the starting address and head pointer. The DMA requests cache lines from memory (one cacheline CL 
at a time). There is guaranteed space in the DMA FIFO (8 CL deep) for data coming back from memory. 
The DMA control logic has copies of the head pointer and the tail pointer. The DMA increments the head 
pointer after making requests for ring commands. Once the DMA copy of the head pointer becomes 
equal to the tail pointer, the DMA stops requesting. 

The parser starts executing once the DMA FIFO has valid commands. All the commands have a header 
DWord packet. Based on the encoding in the header packet, the command may be targeted towards Blit 
Engine or the command parser. After execution of every command, the actual head pointer is updated. 
The ring is considered empty when the head pointer becomes equal to the tail pointer. 

Context Management 

Copy Engine Register State Context  

Register State Context  

EXECLIST CONTEXT 

EXECLIST CONTEXT(PPGTT Base) 

ENGINE CONTEXT 

 

MMIO Dw DW 
Description Offset/Command Unit Count Offset 

CSFE Execlist Context  BCSFE 192 0 

MI_BATCH_BUFFER_END  CSEND 1 00C0 

NOOP  CSEND 127 00C1 

   DW 320 

   K Bytes 1.28 

Copy Engine Power Context 

This section lists the power context image of Copy Engine across generations. 

Blitter Engine Power Context  

The table below captures the data from BCS power context save/restored by PM. Address offset in the 
below table is relative to the starting location of BCS in the overall power context image managed by PM. 

2   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

BCS Power Context Image 

# of Address 
Description   DW Offset(PWR) CSFE/CSBE 

CSFE Power Context with   192 0 CSFE 
Display 

NOOP  BCS 1 00D0 CSBE 

Load_Register_Immediate 0x1100_1003 BCS 1 00D1 CSBE 
header 

GAB MODE REGISTER 0x220a0 BCS 2 00D4 CSBE 

NOOP  BCS 8 00D6 CSBE 

NOOP  BCS 1 00DE CSBE 

MI_BATCH_BUFFER_END  BCS 1 00DF CSBE 

Blitter Command Formats 

2D Commands  

The 2D commands include various flavors of BLT operations, along with commands to set up BLT engine 
state without actually performing a BLT. Most commands are of fixed length, though there are a few 
commands that include a variable amount of "inline" data at the end of the command (in case of legacy 
Blitter command). 

All the following commands are defined in Blitter Instructions. 

2D Command Map 

Opcode 

(28:22) Command 

00h Reserved 

01h XY_SETUP_BLT 

02h Reserved 

03h XY_SETUP_CLIP_BLT 

04h-10h Reserved 

11h XY_SETUP_MONO_PATTERN_SL_BLT 

12h-23h Reserved 

24h XY_PIXEL_BLT 

25h XY_SCANLINES_BLT 

26h XY_TEXT_BLT 

27h-30h ReservedReserved 

31h XY_TEXT_IMMEDIATE_BLT 

32h-3Fh Reserved 

40h COLOR_BLT 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   3 



    

 

Opcode 

(28:22) Command 

41h XY_BLOCK_COPY_BLT 

42h XY_FAST_COPY_BLT 

43h SRC_COPY_BLT 

44h XY_FAST_COLOR_BLT 

45h-47h Reserved 

49h-4Fh Reserved 

50h XY_COLOR_BLT 

51h XY_PAT_BLT 

52h XY_MONO_PAT_BLT 

53h XY_SRC_COPY_BLT 

54h XY_MONO_SRC_COPY_BLT 

55h XY_FULL_BLT 

56h XY_FULL_MONO_SRC_BLT 

57h XY_FULL_MONO_PATTERN_BLT 

58h XY_FULL_MONO_PATTERN_MONO_SRC_BLT 

59h XY_MONO_PAT_FIXED_BLT 

71h XY_MONO_SRC_COPY_IMMEDIATE_BLT 

72h XY_PAT_BLT_IMMEDIATE 

73h XY_SRC_COPY_CHROMA_BLT 

74h XY_FULL_IMMEDIATE_PATTERN_BLT 

75h XY_FULL_MONO_SRC_IMMEDIATE_PATTERN_BL 

76h XY_PAT_CHROMA_BLT 

77h XY_PAT_CHROMA_BLT_IMMEDIATE 

78h-7Fh Reserved 

Blitter Command Header Format 

Type Bits 

 31:29 28:24 23 22 21:0 

Memory 000 Opcode  Identification No./DWord Count 
 Interface  00h - NOP  Command Dependent Data 
 (MI)  0Xh - Single DWord Commands  5:0 - DWord Count 

 1Xh - Two+ DWord Commands  5:0 - DWord Count 
 2Xh - Store Data Commands  5:0 - DWord Count 
 3Xh - Ring/Batch Buffer Cmds 

Reserved 001     

Reserved 011     

 

4   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Type Bits 

 31:29 28:22 21:9 8:0 

Blitter (2D) 010 Command Dependent Data Dword Count 
Command Opcode 

Logical Context Support 

The following are the Logical Context Support Registers: 

Register 

BB_ADDR - Batch Buffer Head Pointer Register 

BB_ADDR_UDW - Batch Buffer Upper Head Pointer Register 

SBB_ADDR - Second Level Batch Buffer Head Pointer Register 

SBB_ADDR_UDW - Second Level Batch Buffer Upper Head Pointer Register 

SYNC_FLIP_STATUS - Wait For Event and Display Flip Flags Register 

SYNC_FLIP_STATUS_1 - Wait For Event and Display Flip Flags Register 1 

SYNC_FLIP_STATUS_2 - Wait For Event and Display Flip Flags Register 2 

CXT_EL_OFFSET - Exec-List Context Offset 

BB_START_ADDR_UDW - Batch Buffer Start Upper Head Pointer Register 

BB_ADDR_DIFF - Batch Address Difference Register 

WAIT_FOR_RC6_EXIT - Control Register for Power Management 

SBB_STATE - Second Level Batch Buffer State Register 

BB_OFFSET - Batch Offset Register 

RING_BUFFER_HEAD_PREEMPT_REG - RING_BUFFER_HEAD_PREEMPT_REG 

BB_PREEMPT_ADDR - Batch Buffer Head Pointer Preemption Register 

BB_PREEMPT_ADDR_UDW - Batch Buffer Upper Head Pointer Preemption Register 

SBB_PREEMPT_ADDR - Second Level Batch Buffer Head Pointer Preemption Register 

SBB_PREEMPT_ADDR_UDW - Second Level Batch Buffer Upper Head Pointer Preemption Register 

MI_PREDICATE_RESULT_1 - Predicate Rendering Data Result 1 

MI_PREDICATE_RESULT_2 - Predicate Rendering Data Result 2 

INDIRECT_CTX - Indirect Context Pointer 

INDIRECT_CTX_OFFSET - Indirect Context Offset Pointer 

BB_PER_CTX_PTR - Batch Buffer Per Context Pointer 

Mode Registers 

The following table describes the Mode Registers. 

Registers 

BCS_CXT_SIZE - BCS Context Sizes 

MI_MODE - Mode Register for Software Interface 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   5 



    

 

Mode Registers (continued) 

Reisters 

INSTPM - Instruction Parser Mode Register 

EXCC - Execute Condition Code Register 

IDLEDLY - Idle Switch Delay 

SEMA_WAIT_POLL - Semaphore Polling Interval on Wait 

RESET_CTRL - Reset Control Register 

PREEMPTION_HINT - Preemption Hint 

PREEMPTION_HINT_UDW - Preemption Hint Upper DWord 

 

Register 

HWS_PGA - Hardware Status Page Address Register 

MI Commands for Blitter Engine 

This chapter describes the formats of the "Memory Interface" commands, including brief descriptions of 
their use. The functions performed by these commands are discussed fully in the Memory Interface 
Functions Device Programming Environment chapter. 

This chapter describes MI Commands for the blitter graphics processing engine. The term "for Blitter 
Engine" in the title has been added to differentiate this chapter from a similar one describing the MI 
commands for the Media Decode Engine and the Rendering Engine. 

The commands detailed in this chapter are used across products. However, slight changes may be 
present in some commands (i.e., for features added or removed), or some commands may be removed 
entirely. Refer to the Preface chapter for product specific summary. 

Commands 

MI_NOOP 

MI_ARB_ON_OFF 

MI_BATCH_BUFFER_START 

The following table lists the non-privileged registers that can be written to from a non-secure batch 
buffer executed from Render Command Streamer. 

User Mode Non-Privileged Registers 

MMIO Name MMIO Offset Size in DWords 

BCS_GPR 22600h 32 

BCS_SWCTRL 22200h 32 

 

Commands 

MI_BATCH_BUFFER_END 

MI_CONDITIONAL_BATCH_BUFFER_END 

MI_DISPLAY_FLIP 

6   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Commands 

MI_LOAD_SCAN_LINES_EXCL 

MI_LOAD_SCAN_LINES_INCL 

MI_FLUSH_DW 

MI_MATH 

MI_REPORT_HEAD 

MI_STORE_DATA_IMM 

MI_ATOMIC 

MI_COPY_MEM_MEM 

MI_LOAD_REGISTER_REG 

MI_LOAD_REGISTER_MEM 

MI_STORE_REGISTER_MEM 

MI_SUSPEND_FLUSH 

MI_USER_INTERRUPT 

MI_WAIT_FOR_EVENT 

MI_SEMAPHORE_SIGNAL 

MI_SEMAPHORE_WAIT 

MI_FORCE_WAKEUP 

Software Control Bit Definitions 

Registers in the range 22XX are not protected from the load register immediate instruction if the 
command is executed in the non-secure batch buffer. 

BCS_SWCTRL - BCS SW Control 

Registers for Blitter Engine Command Streamer 

These are the Registers for the Blitter Engine Command Streamer. 

Also see the Observability volume for related information 

GAB_MODE - Mode Register for GAB 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   7 



    

 

BLT Engine  

Introduction 

2D Rendering can be divided into 2 categories: classical BLTs, described here, and 3D BLTs. 3D BLTs are 
operations which can take advantage of the 3D drawing engine's functionality and access patterns. 

Functions such as Alpha BLTs, arithmetic (bilinear) stretch BLTs, rotations, transposing pixel maps, color 
space conversion, and DIBs are all considered 3D BLTs and are covered in the 3D rendering section. DIBs 
can be thought of as an indexed texture which uses the texture palette for performing the data 
translation. All drawing engines have swappable context. The same hardware can be used by multiple 
driver threads where the current state of the hardware is saved to memory and the appropriate state is 
loaded from memory on thread switches. 

All operands for both 3D and classical BLTs can be in graphics aperture or cacheable system memory. 
Some operands can be immediates which are sent through the command stream. Immediate operands 
are: patterns, monochrome sources, DIB palettes, and DIB source operands. All non-monochrome 
operands which are not tiled have a stride granularity of a double-word (4 bytes). 

The classical BLT commands support both linear addressing and X, Y coordinates with and without 
clipping. All X1 and Y1 destination and clipping coordinates are inclusive, while X2 and Y2 are exclusive. 
Currently, only destination coordinates can be negative. The source and clipping coordinates must be 
positive. If clipping is disabled, but a negative destination coordinate is specified, the negative coordinate 
is clipped to 0. Linear address BLT commands must supply a non-zero height and width. If either height 
or width = 0, then no accesses occur. 

Classical BLT Engine Functional Description  

The graphics controller provides a hardware-based BLT engine to off load the work of moving blocks of 
graphics data from the host CPU. Although the BLT engine is often used simply to copy a block of 
graphics data from the source to the destination, it also has the ability to perform more complex 
functions. The BLT engine is capable of receiving three different blocks of graphics data as input as 
shown in the figure below. The source data may exist in the frame buffer or the Graphics aperture. The 
pattern data always represents an 8x8 block of pixels that can be located in the frame buffer, Graphics 
aperture, or passed through a command packet. The pattern data must be located in linear memory. The 
data already residing at the destination may also be used as an input. The destination data can also be 
located in the frame buffer or graphics aperture. 

8   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

 

Block Diagram and Data Paths of the BLT Engine 

The BLT engine may use any combination of these three different blocks of graphics data as operands, in 
both bit-wise logical operations to generate the actual data to be written to the destination, and in per-
pixel write-masking to control the writing of data to the destination. It is intended that the BLT engine 
will perform these bit-wise and per-pixel operations on color graphics data that is at the same color 
depth that the rest of the graphics system has been set. However, if either the source or pattern data is 
monochrome, the BLT engine has the ability to put either block of graphics data through a process called 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   9 



    

 

"color expansion" that converts monochrome graphics data to color. Since the destination is often a 
location in the on-screen portion of the frame buffer, it is assumed that any data already at the 
destination will be of the appropriate color depth. 

Basic BLT Functional Considerations  

Color Depth Configuration and Color Expansion  

The graphics system and BLT engine can be configured for color depths of 8, 16, and 32 bits per pixel. 

The configuration of the BLT engine for a given color depth dictates the number of bytes of graphics 
data that the BLT engine will read and write for each pixel while performing a BLT operation. It is 
assumed that any graphics data already residing at the destination which is used as an input is already at 
the color depth to which the BLT engine is configured. Similarly, it is assumed that any source or pattern 
data used as an input has this same color depth, unless one or both is monochrome. If either the source 
or pattern data is monochrome, the BLT engine performs a process called "color expansion" to convert 
such monochrome data to color at the color depth to which the BLT engine has been set. 

During "color expansion" the individual bits of monochrome source or pattern data that correspond to 
individual pixels are converted into 1, 2, or 4 bytes (whichever is appropriate for the color depth to which 
the BLT engine has been set). If a given bit of monochrome source or pattern data carries a value of 1, 
then the byte(s) of color data resulting from the conversion process are set to carry the value of a 
specified foreground color. If a given bit of monochrome source or pattern data carries a value of 0, the 
resulting byte(s) are set to the value of a specified background color or not written if transparency is 
selected. 

The BLT engine is set to a default configuration color depth of 8, 16, or 32 bits per pixel through BLT 
command packets. Whether the source and pattern data are color or monochrome must be specified 
using command packets. Foreground and background colors for the color expansion of both 
monochrome source and pattern data are also specified through the command packets. The source 
foreground and background colors used in the color expansion of monochrome source data are 
specified independently of those used for the color expansion of monochrome pattern data. 

Graphics Data Size Limitations  

The BLT engine is capable of transferring very large quantities of graphics data. Any graphics data read 
from and written to the destination is permitted to represent a number of pixels that occupies up to 
65,536 scan lines and up to 32,768 bytes per scan line at the destination. The maximum number of pixels 
that may be represented per scan line's worth of graphics data depends on the color depth. 

Any source data used as an input must represent the same number of pixels as is represented by any 
data read from or written to the destination, and it must be organized so as to occupy the same number 
of scan lines and pixels per scan line. 

The actual number of scan lines and bytes per scan line required to accommodate data read from or 
written to the destination are set in the destination width & height registers or using X and Y coordinates 
within the command packets. These two values are essential in the programming of the BLT engine, 
because the engine uses these two values to determine when a given BLT operation has been completed. 

10   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Bit-Wise Operations  

The BLT engine can perform any one of 256 possible bit-wise operations using various combinations of 
the three previously described blocks of graphics data that the BLT engine can receive as input. 

The choice of bit-wise operation selects which of the three inputs will be used, as well as the particular 
logical operation to be performed on corresponding bits from each of the selected inputs. The BLT 
engine automatically foregoes reading any form of graphics data that has not been specified as an input 
by the choice of bit-wise operation. An 8-bit code written to the raster operation field of the command 
packets chooses the bit-wise operation. The following table lists the available bit-wise operations and 
their corresponding 8-bit codes. 

Bit-Wise Operations and 8-Bit Codes (00-3F) 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

00 writes all 0's 20 D and ( P and ( notS )) 

01 not( D or ( P or S ))) 21 not( S or( D xor P )) 

02 D and ( not( P or S )) 22 D and ( notS ) 

03 not( P or S ) 23 not( S or ( P and ( notD ))) 

04 S and ( not( D or P )) 24 ( S xor P ) and ( D xor S ) 

05 not( D or P ) 25 not( P xor ( D and ( not( S and P )))) 

06 not( P or ( not( D xor S ))) 26 S xor ( D or ( P and S )) 

07 not( P or ( D and S )) 27 S xor ( D or ( not( P xor S ))) 

08 S and ( D and ( notP )) 28 D and ( P xor S ) 

09 not( P or ( D xor S )) 29 not( P xor ( S xor ( D or ( P and S )))) 

0A D and ( notP ) 2A D and ( not( P and S )) 

0B not( P or ( S and ( notD ))) 2B not( S xor (( S xor P ) and ( P xor D ))) 

0C S and ( notP ) 2C S xor ( P and ( D or S )) 

0D not( P or ( D and ( notS ))) 2D P xor ( S or ( notD )) 

0E not( P or ( not( D or S ))) 2E P xor ( S or ( D xor P )) 

0F notP 2F not( P and ( S or ( notD ))) 

10 P and ( not( D or S )) 30 P and ( notS ) 

11 not( D or S ) 31 not( S or ( D and ( notP ))) 

12 not( S or ( not( D xor P ))) 32 S xor ( D or ( P or S )) 

13 not( S or ( D and P )) 33 notS 

14 not( D or ( not( P xor S ))) 34 S xor ( P or ( D and S )) 

15 not( D or ( P and S )) 35 S xor ( P or ( not( D xor S ))) 

16 P xor ( S xor (D and ( not( P and S )))) 36 S xor ( D or P ) 

17 not( S xor (( S xor P ) and ( D xor S ))) 37 not( S and ( D or P )) 

18 ( S xor P ) and ( P xor D ) 38 P xor ( S and ( D or P )) 

19 not( S xor ( D and ( not( P and S )))) 39 S xor ( P or ( notD )) 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   11 



    

 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

1A P xor ( D or ( S and P )) 3A S xor ( P or ( D xor S )) 

1B not( S xor ( D and ( P xor S ))) 3B not( S and ( P or ( notD ))) 

1C P xor ( S or ( D and P )) 3C P xor S 

1D not( D xor ( S and ( P xor D ))) 3D S xor ( P or ( not( D or S ))) 

1E P xor ( D or S ) 3E S xor ( P or ( D and ( notS ))) 

1F not( P and ( D or S )) 3F not( P and S ) 

 

Notes: 

S = Source Data 
 P = Pattern Data 
 D = Data Already Existing at the Destination 

Bit-Wise Operations and 8-bit Codes (40 - 7F) 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

40 P and ( S and ( notD )) 60 P and ( D xor S ) 

41 not( D or ( P xor S )) 61 not( D xor ( S xor ( P or ( D and S )))) 

42 ( S xor D ) and ( P xor D ) 62 D xor ( S and ( P or D )) 

43 not( S xor ( P and ( not( D and S )))) 63 S xor ( D or ( notP )) 

44 S and ( notD ) 64 S xor ( D and ( P or S )) 

45 not( D or ( P and ( notS ))) 65 D xor ( S or ( notP )) 

46 D xor ( S or ( P and D )) 66 D xor S 

47 not( P xor ( S and ( D xor P ))) 67 S xor ( D or ( not( P or S ))) 

48 S and ( D xor P ) 68 not( D xor ( S xor ( P or ( not( D or S ))))) 

49 not( P xor ( D xor ( S or ( P and D )))) 69 not( P xor ( D xor S )) 

4A D xor ( P and ( S or D )) 6A D xor ( P and S ) 

4B P xor ( D or ( notS )) 6B not( P xor ( S xor ( D and ( P or S )))) 

4C S and ( not( D and P )) 6C S xor ( D and P ) 

4D not( S xor (( S xor P ) or ( D xor S ))) 6D not( P xor ( D xor ( S and ( P or D )))) 

4E P xor ( D or ( S xor P )) 6E S xor ( D and ( P or ( notS ))) 

4F not( P and ( D or ( notS ))) 6F not( P and ( not( D xor S ))) 

50 P and ( notD ) 70 P and ( not( D and S )) 

51 not( D or ( S and ( notP ))) 71 not( S xor (( S xor D ) and ( P xor D ))) 

52 D xor (P or ( S and D )) 72 S xor ( D or ( P xor S )) 

53 not( S xor ( P and ( D xor S ))) 73 not( S and ( D or ( notP ))) 

54 not( D or ( not( P or S ))) 74 D xor ( S or ( P xor D )) 

55 notD 75 not( D and ( S or ( notP ))) 

56 D xor ( P or S ) 76 S xor ( D or ( P and ( notS ))) 

12   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

57 not( D and ( P or S )) 77 not( D and S ) 

58 P xor ( D and ( S or P )) 78 P xor ( D and S ) 

59 D xor ( P or ( notS )) 79 not( D xor ( S xor ( P and ( D or S )))) 

5A D xor P 7A D xor ( P and ( S or ( notD ))) 

5B D xor ( P or ( not( S or D ))) 7B not( S and ( not( D xor P ))) 

5C D xor ( P or ( S xor D )) 7C S xor ( P and ( D or ( notS ))) 

5D not( D and ( P or ( notS ))) 7D not( D and ( not( P xor S ))) 

5E D xor ( P or ( S and ( notD ))) 7E ( S xor P ) or ( D xor S ) 

5F not( D and P ) 7F not( D and ( P and S )) 

 

Notes: 

S = Source Data 
 P = Pattern Data 
 D = Data Already Existing at the Destination 

Bit-Wise Operations and 8-bit Codes (80 - BF) 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

80 D and ( P and S ) A0 D and P 

81 not(( S xor P ) or ( D xor S )) A1 not( P xor ( D or ( S and ( notP )))) 

82 D and ( not( P xor S )) A2 D and ( P or ( notS )) 

83 not( S xor ( P and ( D or ( notS )))) A3 not( D xor ( P or ( S xor D ))) 

84 S and ( not( D xor P )) A4 not( P xor ( D or ( not( S or P )))) 

85 not( P xor ( D and ( S or ( notP )))) A5 not( P xor D ) 

86 D xor ( S xor ( P and ( D or S ))) A6 D xor ( S and ( notP )) 

87 not( P xor ( D and S )) A7 not( P xor ( D and ( S or P ))) 

88 D and S A8 D and ( P or S ) 

89 not( S xor ( D or ( P and ( notS )))) A9 not( D xor ( P or S )) 

8A D and ( S or ( notP )) AA D 

8B not( D xor ( S or ( P xor D ))) AB D or ( not( P or S)) 

8C S and ( D or ( notP )) AC S xor (P and ( D xor S )) 

8D not( S xor ( D or ( P xor S ))) AD not( D xor ( P or ( S and D ))) 

8E S xor (( S xor D ) and ( P xor D )) AE D or ( S and ( notP )) 

8F not( P and ( not( D and S ))) AF D or ( notP ) 

90 P and ( not( D xor S )) B0 P and ( D or ( notS )) 

91 not( S xor ( D and ( P or ( notS )))) B1 not( P xor ( D or ( S xor P ))) 

92 D xor ( P xor ( S and ( D or P ))) B2 S xor (( S xor P ) or ( D xor S )) 

93 not( S xor ( P and D )) B3 not( S and ( not( D and P ))) 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   13 



    

 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

94 P xor ( S xor ( D and ( P or S ))) B4 P xor ( S and ( notD )) 

95 not( D xor ( P and S )) B5 not( D xor ( P and ( S or D ))) 

96 D xor ( P xor S ) B6 D xor ( P xor ( S or ( D and P ))) 

97 P xor ( S xor ( D or ( not( P or S )))) B7 not( S and ( D xor P )) 

98 not( S xor ( D or ( not( P or S )))) B8 P xor ( S and ( D xor P )) 

99 not( D xor S ) B9 not( D xor ( S or ( P and D ))) 

9A D xor ( P and ( notS )) BA D or ( P and ( notS )) 

9B not( S xor ( D and ( P or S ))) BB D or ( notS ) 

9C S xor ( P and ( notD )) BC S xor ( P and ( not( D and S ))) 

9D not( D xor ( S and ( P or D ))) BD not(( S xor D ) and ( P xor D )) 

9E D xor ( S xor ( P or ( D and S ))) BE D or ( P xor S ) 

9F not( P and ( D xor S )) BF D or ( not( P and S )) 

 

Notes: 

S = Source Data 
 P = Pattern Data 
 D = Data Already Existing at the Destination 

Bit-Wise Operations and 8-bit Codes (C0 - FF) 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

C0 P and S E0 P and ( D or S ) 

C1 not( S xor ( P or ( D and ( notS )))) E1 not( P xor ( D or S )) 

C2 not( S xor ( P or ( not( D or S )))) E2 D xor ( S and ( P xor D )) 

C3 not( P xor S ) E3 not( P xor ( S or ( D and P ))) 

C4 S and ( P or ( notD )) E4 S xor ( D and ( P xor S )) 

C5 not( S xor ( P or ( D xor S ))) E5 not( P xor ( D or ( S and P ))) 

C6 S xor ( D and ( notP )) E6 S xor ( D and ( not( P and S ))) 

C7 not( P xor ( S and ( D or P ))) E7 not(( S xor P ) and ( P xor D )) 

C8 S and ( D or P ) E8 S xor (( S xor P ) and ( D xor S )) 

C9 not( S xor ( P or D )) E9 not( D xor ( S xor ( P and ( not( D and S ))))) 

CA D xor ( P and ( S xor D )) EA D or ( P and S ) 

CB not( S xor ( P or ( D and S ))) EB D or ( not( P xor S )) 

CC S EC S or ( D and P ) 

CD S or ( not( D or P )) ED S or ( not( D xor P )) 

CE S or ( D and ( notP )) EE D or S 

CF S or ( notP ) EF S or ( D or ( notP )) 

D0 P and ( S or ( notD )) F0 P 

14   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Code Value Written to Bits at Destination Code Value Written to Bits at Destination 

D1 not( P xor ( S or ( D xor P ))) F1 P or ( not( D or S )) 

D2 P xor ( D and ( notS )) F2 P or ( D and ( notS )) 

D3 not( S xor ( P and ( D or S ))) F3 P or ( notS ) 

D4 S xor (( S xor P ) and ( P xor D )) F4 P or ( S and ( notD )) 

D5 not( D and ( not( P and S ))) F5 P or ( notD ) 

D6 P xor ( S xor ( D or ( P and S ))) F6 P or ( D xor S ) 

D7 not( D and ( P xor S )) F7 P or ( not( D and S )) 

D8 P xor ( D and ( S xor P )) F8 P or ( D and S ) 

D9 not( S xor ( D or ( P and S ))) F9 P or ( not( D xor S )) 

DA D xor ( P and ( not( S and D ))) FA D or P 

DB not(( S xor P ) and ( D xor S )) FB D or ( P or ( notS )) 

DC S or ( P and ( notD )) FC P or S 

DD S or ( notD ) FD P or ( S or ( notD )) 

DE S or ( D xor P ) FE D or ( P or S ) 

DF S or ( not( D and P )) FF writes all 1's 

 

Notes: 

S = Source Data 
 P = Pattern Data 
 D = Data Already Existing at the Destination 

Per-Pixel Write-Masking Operations  

The BLT engine is able to perform per-pixel write-masking with various data sources used as pixel masks 
to constrain which pixels at the destination are to be written to by the BLT engine. As shown in the figure 
below, either monochrome source or monochrome pattern data may be used as pixel masks. Color 
pattern data cannot be used. Another available pixel mask is derived by comparing a particular color 
range per color channel to either the color already specified for a given pixel at the destination or source. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   15 



    

 

 

Block Diagram and Data Paths of the BLT Engine 

The command packets can specify the monochrome source or the monochrome pattern data as a pixel 
mask. When this feature is used, the bits that carry a value of 0 cause the bytes of the corresponding 
pixel at the destination to not be written to by the BLT engine, thereby preserving whatever data was 
originally carried within those bytes. This feature can be used in writing characters to the display, while 
also preserving the pre-existing backgrounds behind those characters. When both operands are in the 
transparent mode, the logical AND of the 2 operands are used for the write enables per pixel. 

16   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

The 3-bit field, destination transparency mode, within the command packets can select per-pixel write-
masking with a mask based on the results of color comparisons. The monochrome source background 
and foreground are range compared with either the bytes for the pixels at the destination or the source 
operand. This operation is described in the BLT command packet and register descriptions. 

When the Source and Destination Locations Overlap  

It is possible to have BLT operations in which the locations of the source and destination data overlap. 
This frequently occurs in BLT operations where a user is shifting the position of a graphical item on the 
display by only a few pixels. In these situations, the BLT engine must be programmed so that destination 
data is not written into destination locations that overlap with source locations before the source data at 
those locations has been read. Otherwise, the source data will become corrupted. The XY commands 
determine whether there is an overlap and perform the accesses in the proper direction to avoid data 
corruption. 

The following figure shows how the source data can be corrupted when a rectangular block is copied 
from a source location to an overlapping destination location. The BLT engine typically reads from the 
source location and writes to the destination location starting with the left-most pixel in the top-most 
line of both, as shown in step (a). As shown in step (b), corruption of the source data has already started 
with the copying of the top-most line in step (a) -- part of the source that originally contained lighter-
colored pixels has now been overwritten with darker-colored pixels. More source data corruption occurs 
as steps (b) through (d) are performed. At step (e), another line of the source data is read, but the two 
right-most pixels of this line are in the region where the source and destination locations overlap, and 
where the source has already been overwritten as a result of the copying of the top-most line in step (a). 
Starting in step (f), darker-colored pixels can be seen in the destination where lighter-colored pixels 
should be. This errant effect occurs repeatedly throughout the remaining steps in this BLT operation. As 
more lines are copied from the source location to the destination location, it becomes clear that the end 
result is not what was originally intended. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   17 



    

 

Source Corruption in BLT with Overlapping Source and Destination Locations 

 

The BLT engine can alter the order in which source data is read and destination data is written when 
necessary to avoid source data corruption problems when the source and destination locations overlap. 
The command packets provide the ability to change the point at which the BLT engine begins reading 

18   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

and writing data from the upper left-hand corner (the usual starting point) to one of the other three 
corners. The BLT engine may be set to read data from the source and write it to the destination starting 
at any of the four corners of the panel. 

The XY command packets perform the necessary comparisons and start at the proper corner of each 
operand which avoids data corruption. 

Correctly Performed BLT with Overlapping Source and Destination Locations 

 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   19 



    

 

The following figure illustrates how this feature of the BLT engine can be used to perform the same BLT 
operation as was illustrated in the figure above, while avoiding the corruption of source data. As shown 
in the figure below, the BLT engine reads the source data and writes the data to the destination starting 
with the right-most pixel of the bottom-most line. By doing this, no pixel existing where the source and 
destination locations overlap will ever be written to before it is read from by the BLT engine. By the time 
the BLT operation has reached step (e) where two pixels existing where the source and destination 
locations overlap are about to be over written, the source data for those two pixels has already been 
read. 

Suggested Starting Points for Possible Source and Destination Overlap Situations 

 

The figure above shows the recommended lines and pixels to be used as starting points in each of 8 
possible ways in which the source and destination locations may overlap. In general, the starting point 
should be within the area in which the source and destination overlap. 

20   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Basic Graphics Data Considerations  

Contiguous vs. Discontinuous Graphics Data  

Graphics data stored in memory, particularly in the frame buffer of a graphics system, has organizational 
characteristics that often distinguish it from other varieties of data. The main distinctive feature is the 
tendency for graphics data to be organized in a discontinuous block of graphics data made up of 
multiple sub-blocks of bytes, instead of a single contiguous block of bytes. 

Representation of On-Screen Single 6-Pixel Line in the Frame Buffer 

 

The figure above shows an example of contiguous graphics data -- a horizontal line made up of six 
adjacent pixels within a single scan line on a display with a resolution of 640x480. Presuming that the 
graphics system driving this display has been set to 8 bits per pixel and that the frame buffer's starting 
address of 0h corresponds to the upper left-most pixel of this display, then the six pixels that make this 
horizontal line starting at coordinates (256, 256) occupies the six bytes starting at frame buffer address 
28100h, and ending at address 28105h. 

In this case, there is only one scan line's worth of graphics data in this single horizontal line, so the block 
of graphics data for all six of these pixels exists as a single, contiguous block comprised of only these six 
bytes. The starting address and the number of bytes are the only pieces of information that a BLT engine 
would require to read this block of data. 

The simplicity of the above example of a single horizontal line contrasts sharply to the example of 
discontinuous graphics data depicted in the figure below. The simple six-pixel line of the figure above is 
now accompanied by three more six-pixel lines placed on subsequent scan lines, resulting in the 6x4 
block of pixels shown. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   21 



    

 

Representation of On-Screen 6x4 Array of Pixels in the Frame Buffer 

 

Since there are other pixels on each of the scan lines on which this 6x4 block exists that are not part of 
this 6x4 block, what appears to be a single 6x4 block of pixels on the display must be represented by a 
discontinuous block of graphics data made up of 4 separate sub-blocks of six bytes apiece in the frame 
buffer at addresses 28100h, 28380h, 28600h, and 28880h. This situation makes the task of reading what 
appears to be a simple 6x4 block of pixels more complex. However, there are two characteristics of this 
6x4 block of pixels that help simplify the task of specifying the locations of all 24 bytes of this 
discontinuous block of graphics data: all four of the sub-blocks are of the same length, and the four sub-
blocks are separated from each other at equal intervals. 

The BLT engine is designed to make use of these characteristics of graphics data to simplify the 
programming required to handle discontinuous blocks of graphics data. For such a situation, the BLT 
engine requires only four pieces of information: the starting address of the first sub-block, the length of 
a sub-block, the offset (in bytes), pitch, of the starting address of each subsequent sub-block, and the 
quantity of sub-blocks. 

Source Data  

The source data may exist in the frame buffer or elsewhere in the graphics aperture where the BLT 
engine may read it directly, or it may be provided to the BLT engine by the host CPU through the 
command packets. The block of source graphics data may be either contiguous or discontinuous, and 
may be either in color (with a color depth that matches that to which the BLT engine has been set) or 
monochrome. 

22   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

The source select bit in the command packets specifies whether the source data exists in the frame buffer 
or is provided through the command packets. Monochrome source data is always specified as being 
supplied through an immediate command packet. 

If the color source data resides within the frame buffer or elsewhere in the graphics aperture, then the 
Source Address Register, specified in the command packets is used to specify the address of the source. 

In cases where the host CPU provides the source data, it does so by writing the source data to ring buffer 
directly after the BLT command that requires the data or uses an IMMEDIATE_INDIRECT_BLT command 
packet which has a size and pointer to the operand in Graphics aperture. 

The block of bytes sent by the host CPU through the command packets must be quadword-aligned and 
the source data contained within the block of bytes must also be aligned. 

To accommodate discontinuous source data, the source and destination pitch registers can be used to 
specify the offset in bytes from the beginning of one scan line's worth source data to the next. Otherwise, 
if the source data is contiguous, then an offset equal to the length of a scan line's worth of source data 
should be specified. 

Monochrome Source Data  

The opcode of the command packet specifies whether the source data is color or monochrome. Since 
monochrome graphics data only uses one bit per pixel, each byte of monochrome source data typically 
carries data for 8 pixels which hinders the use of byte-oriented parameters when specifying the location 
and size of valid source data. Some additional parameters must be specified to ensure the proper 
reading and use of monochrome source data by the BLT engine. The BLT engine also provides additional 
options for the manipulation of monochrome source data versus color source data. 

The various bit-wise logical operations and per-pixel write-masking operations were designed to work 
with color data. In order to use monochrome data, the BLT engine converts it into color through a 
process called color expansion, which takes place as a BLT operation is performed. In color expansion the 
single bits of monochrome source data are converted into one, two, or four bytes (depending on the 
color depth) of color data that are set to carry value corresponding to either the foreground or 
background color that have been specified for use in this conversion process. If a given bit of 
monochrome source data carries a value of 1, then the byte(s) of color data resulting from the 
conversion process will be set to carry the value of the foreground color. If a given bit of monochrome 
source data carries a value of 0, then the resulting byte(s) will be set to the value of the background 
color. The foreground and background colors used in the color expansion of monochrome source data 
can be set in the source expansion foreground color register and the source expansion background color 
register. 

The BLT Engine requires that the bit alignment of each scan line's worth of monochrome source data be 
specified. Each scan line's worth of monochrome source data is word aligned but can actually start on 
any bit boundary of the first byte. Monochrome text is special cased, and it is bit or byte packed, where 
in bit packed there are no invalid pixels (bits) between scan lines. There is a 3 bit field which indicates the 
starting pixel position within the first byte for each scan line, Mono Source Start. 

Note that the Monosource surface start Base Address, should always be Cache Line (64byte) aligned. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   23 



    

 

The BLT engine also provides various clipping options for use with specific BLT commands (BLT_TEXT) 
with a monochrome source. Clipping is supported through: Clip rectangle Y addresses or coordinates 
and X coordinates along with scan line starting and ending addresses (with Y addresses) along with X 
starting and ending coordinates. 

The maximum immediate source size is 128 bytes. 

Pattern Data  

The color pattern data must exist within the frame buffer or Graphics aperture where the BLT engine may 
read it directly or it can be sent through the command stream. The pattern data must be located in linear 
memory. 

Note also that the Color Pattern surface start Base Address, should always be Cache Line (64byte) 
aligned. 

Monochrome pattern data is supplied by the command packet when it is to be used. As shown in figure 
below, the block of pattern graphics data always represents a block of 8x8 pixels. The bits or bytes of a 
block of pattern data may be organized in the frame buffer memory in only one of three ways, 
depending upon its color depth which may be 8, 16, or 32 bits per pixel (whichever matches the color 
depth to which the BLT engine has been set), or monochrome. 

The maximum color pattern size is 256 bytes. 

24   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Pattern Data -- Always an 8x8 Array of Pixels 

 

The Pattern Address Register is used to specify the address of the color pattern data at which the block 
of pattern data begins. The three least significant bits of the address written to this register are ignored, 
because the address must be in terms of quadwords. This is because the pattern must always be located 
on an address boundary equal to its size. Monochrome patterns take up 8 bytes, or a single quadword of 
space, and are loaded through the command packet that uses it. Similarly, color patterns with color 
depths of 8, 16, and 32 bits per pixel must start on 64-byte, 128-byte and 256-byte boundaries, 
respectively. The next 3 figures show how monochrome, 8bpp, 16bpp, and 32bpp pattern data , 
respectively, is organized in memory. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   25 



    

 

8bpp Pattern Data -- Occupies 64 Bytes (8 quadwords) 

 

16bpp Pattern Data -- Occupies 128 Bytes (16 quadwords) 

 

26   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

32bpp Pattern Data -- Occupies 256 Bytes (32 quadwords) 

 

The opcode of the command packet specifies whether the pattern data is color or monochrome. The 
various bit-wise logical operations and per-pixel write-masking operations were designed to work with 
color data. In order to use monochrome pattern data, the BLT engine is designed to convert it into color 
through a process called "color expansion" which takes place as a BLT operation is performed. In color 
expansion, the single bits of monochrome pattern data are converted into one, two, or four bytes 
(depending on the color depth) of color data that are set to carry values corresponding to either the 
foreground or background color that have been specified for use in this process. The foreground color is 
used for pixels corresponding to a bit of monochrome pattern data that carry the value of 1, while the 
background color is used where the corresponding bit of monochrome pattern data carries the value of 
0. The foreground and background colors used in the color expansion of monochrome pattern data can 
be set in the Pattern Expansion Foreground Color Register and Pattern Expansion Background Color 
Register. 

Destination Data  

BLT Programming Examples  

Pattern Fill -- A Very Simple BLT  

In this example, a rectangular area on the screen is to be filled with a color pattern stored as pattern data 
in off-screen memory. The screen has a resolution of 1024x768 and the graphics system has been set to 
a color depth of 8 bits per pixel. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   27 



    

 

On-Screen Destination for Example Pattern Fill BLT 

 

As shown in the figure above, the rectangular area to be filled has its upper left-hand corner at 
coordinates (128, 128) and its lower right-hand corner at coordinates (191, 191). These coordinates 
define a rectangle covering 64 scan lines, each scan line's worth of which is 64 pixels in length -- in other 
words, an array of 64x64 pixels. Presuming that the pixel at coordinates (0, 0) corresponds to the byte at 
address 00h in the frame buffer memory, the pixel at (128, 128) corresponds to the byte at address 
20080h. 

28   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Pattern Data for Example Pattern Fill BLT 

 

As shown in figure above, the pattern data occupies 64 bytes starting at address 100000h. As always, the 
pattern data represents an 8x8 array of pixels. 

The BLT command packet is used to select the features to be used in this BLT operation, and must be 
programmed carefully. The vertical alignment field should be set to 0 to select the top-most horizontal 
row of the pattern as the starting row used in drawing the pattern starting with the top-most scan line 
covered by the destination. The pattern data is in color with a color depth of 8 bits per pixel, so the 
dynamic color enable should be asserted with the dynamic color depth field should be set to 0. Since this 
BLT operation does not use per-pixel write-masking (destination transparency mode), this field should be 
set to 0. Finally, the raster operation field should be programmed with the 8-bit value of F0h to select the 
bit-wise logical operation in which a simple copy of the pattern data to the destination takes place. 
Selecting this bit-wise operation in which no source data is used as an input causes the BLT engine to 
automatically forego either reading source data from the frame buffer. 

The Destination Pitch Register must be programmed with number of bytes in the interval from the start 
of one scan line's worth of destination data to the next. Since the color depth is 8 bits per pixel and the 
horizontal resolution of the display is 1024, the value to be programmed into these bits is 400h, which is 
equal to the decimal value of 1024. 

Bits [31:3] of the Pattern Address Register must be programmed with the address of the pattern data. 

Similarly, bits [31:0] of the Destination Address Register must be programmed with the byte address at 
the destination that will be written to first. In this case, the address is 20080h, which corresponds to the 
byte representing the pixel at coordinates (128, 128). 

This BLT operation does not use the values in the Source Address Register or the Source Expansion 
Background or Foreground Color Registers. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   29 



    

 

The Destination Width and Height Registers (or the Destination X and Y Coordinates) must be 
programmed with values that describe to the BLT engine the 64x64 pixel size of the destination location. 
The height should be set to carry the value of 40h, indicating that the destination location covers 64 scan 
lines. The width should be set to carry the value of 40h, indicating that each scan line's worth of 
destination data occupies 64 bytes. All of this information is written to the ring buffer using the PAT_BLT 
(or XY_PAT_BLT) command packet. 

Results of Example Pattern Fill BLT 

 

The figure above shows the end result of performing this BLT operation. The 8x8 pattern has been 
repeatedly copied ("tiled") into the entire 64x64 area at the destination. 

30   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Drawing Characters Using a Font Stored in System Memory  

In this example BLT operation, a lowercase letter "f" is to be drawn in black on a display with a gray 
background. The resolution of the display is 1024x768, and the graphics system has been set to a color 
depth of 8 bits per pixel. 

On-Screen Destination for Example Character Drawing BLT 

 

The figure above shows the display on which this letter "f" is to be drawn. As shown in this figure, the 
entire display has been filled with a gray color. The letter "f" is to be drawn into an 8x8 region on the 
display with the upper left-hand corner at the coordinates (128, 128). 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   31 



    

 

Source Data in System Memory for Example Character Drawing BLT 

 

The figure above shows both the 8x8 pattern making up the letter "f" and how it is represented 
somewhere in the host's system memory -- the actual address in system memory is not important. The 
letter "f" is represented in system memory by a block of monochrome graphics data that occupies 8 
bytes. Each byte carries the 8 bits needed to represent the 8 pixels in each scan line's worth of this 
graphics data. This type of pattern is often used to store character fonts in system memory. 

During this BLT operation, the host CPU will read this representation of the letter "f" from system 
memory, and write it to the BLT engine by performing memory writes to the ring buffer as an immediate 
monochrome BLT operand following the BLT_TEXT command. The BLT engine will receive this data 
through the command stream and use it as the source data for this BLT operation. The BLT engine will be 
set to the same color depth as the graphics system -- 8 bits per pixel, in this case. Since the source data 
in this BLT operation is monochrome, color expansion must be used to convert it to an 8 bpp color 
depth. To ensure that the gray background behind this letter "f" is preserved, per-pixel write masking will 
be performed, using the monochrome source data as the pixel mask. 

The BLT Setup and Text_immediate command packets are used to select the features to be used in this 
BLT operation. Only the fields required by these two command packets must be programmed carefully. 
The BLT engine ignores all other registers and fields. The source select field in the Text_immediate 
command must be set to 1, to indicate that the source data is provided by the host CPU through the 
command packet. Finally, the raster operation field should be programmed with the 8-bit value CCh to 
select the bit-wise logical operation that simply copies the source data to the destination. Selecting this 
bit-wise operation in which no pattern data is used as an input, causes the BLT engine to automatically 
forego reading pattern data from the frame buffer. 

The Setup Pattern/Source Expansion Foreground Color Register to specify the color with which the letter 
"f" will be drawn. There is no Source address. All scan lines of the glyph are bit packed and the clipping is 
controlled by the ClipRect registers from the SETUP_BLT command and the Destination Y1, Y2, X1, and 

32   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

X2 registers in the TEXT_BLT command. Only the pixels that are within (inclusive comparisons) the clip 
rectangle are written to the destination surface. 

The Destination Pitch Register must be programmed with a value equal to the number of bytes in the 
interval between the first bytes of each adjacent scan line's worth of destination data. Since the color 
depth is 8 bits per pixel and the horizontal resolution of the display is 1024 pixels, the value to be 
programmed into these bits is 400h, which is equal to the decimal value of 1024. Since the source data 
used in this BLT operation is monochrome, the BLT engine will not use a byte-oriented pitch value for the 
source data. 

Since the source data is monochrome, color expansion is required to convert it to color with a color 
depth of 8 bits per pixel. Since the Setup Pattern/Source Expansion Foreground Color Register is selected 
to specify the foreground color of black to be used in drawing the letter "f", this register must be 
programmed with the value for that color. With the graphics system set for a color depth of 8 bits per 
pixel, the actual colors are specified in the RAMDAC palette, and the 8 bits stored in the frame buffer for 
each pixel actually specify the index used to select a color from that palette. This example assumes that 
the color specified at index 00h in the palette is black, and therefore bits [7:0] of this register should be 
set to 00h to select black as the foreground color. The BLT engine ignores bits [31:8] of this register 
because the selected color depth is 8 bits per pixel. Even though the color expansion being performed 
on the source data normally requires that both the foreground and background colors be specified, the 
value used to specify the background color is not important in this example. Per-pixel write-masking is 
being performed with the monochrome source data as the pixel mask, which means that none of the 
pixels in the source data that will be converted to the background color will ever be written to the 
destination. Since these pixels will never be seen, the value programmed into the Pattern/Source 
Expansion Background Color Register to specify a background color is not important. 

The Destination Width and Height Registers are not used. The Y1, Y2, X1, and X2 are used to describe to 
the BLT engine the 8x8 pixel size of the destination location. The Destination Y1 and Y2 address (or 
coordinate) registers must be programmed with the starting and ending scan line address (or Y 
coordinates) of the destination data. This address is specified as an offset from the start of the frame 
buffer of the scan line at the destination that will be written to first. The destination X1 and X2 registers 
must be programmed with the starting and ending pixel offsets from the beginning of the scan line. 

This BLT operation does not use the values in the Pattern Address Register, the Source Expansion 
Background Color Register, or the Source Expansion Foreground Color Register. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   33 



    

 

Results of Example Character Drawing BLT 

 

The preceding shows the end result of performing this BLT operation. Only the pixels that form part of 
the actual letter "f" have been drawn into the 8x8 destination location on the display, leaving the other 
pixels within the destination with their original gray color. 

34   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Fast Copy Engine  

Fast Copy Engine is capable of performing sub-resource copy or fill operation saturating the full memory 
bandwidth. It is a resource processor that can copy from a source of arbitrary format. Fast Copy Engine is 
capable of understanding the concept of resource and sub-resources. It can support data transfer 
between overlapping surfaces. It can support state-full compression and decompression. Copy Engine 
supports both linear as well as tiled memory and operate on both system as well as local memory (when 
it is not a UMA system). In case of UMA system there is just a single memory. 

Fast Copy Engine can be used for paging in or paging out resources to and from GPU. It also supports 
Fast Clear and regular clear operation of AUX enabled surfaces. It can be used to perform resolve 
operation on compressed surfaces. Copy Engines can operate on 2D surfaces defined using pixel 
coordinates as well as linear surfaces defined using virtual addresses. 

Fast Copy Engine performance scales with number of memory slices in the system.  

Copy workloads are submitted to the appropriate copy engines by the software through copy queues. 
BLT command streamers parses the commands and submits them to Fast Copy Engine. Copy Engines are 
split into two parts: 

1. Copy Engine Front-end - splits an incoming command/BLIT into smaller commands/sub-blits 

2. Copy Engine Back-end - it takes sub-blits and performs actual cachline read/write operations 

Performance scaling of the Fast Copy Engine is achieved by increasing the number of copies of Back-end 
(Sub-copy Engine) attached to the single front-end of the fast copy engine. Fast copy engine can handle 
sub-blit level dependencies (producer consumer relationship). Software may have to insert appropriate 
flushes between commands to handle some dependencies not supported by copy engine hardware, as 
defined at a later section. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   35 



    

 

BLT Instruction Overview  

There are two blitter back-ends behind the single engine viz. Classical Blitter or Legacy Blitter Engine and 
Fast Copy Engine. Each of which operates on a separate mutually exclusive set of instructions. 
Commands for both the back-ends can be submitted to the same Blitter Command Streamer and based 
on the command it is passed on to the appropriate back-end and executed there. 

Each instruction consists of multiple dwords, where first dword is the header, which can identify the type 
of instruction, instruction opcode, length of instruction etc. Header may contain additional instruction 
fields as well. Fields may sometime need more than one dword.  

Most of the instructions can operate independently without state other than some Legacy Blitter 
commands involving clip rectangles that programs some BRs (Blitter Registers) before executing those 
commands.  

There are specific MMIO based config registers that configures how Legacy Blitter or Fast Copy Engine is 
expected to operate. 

Legacy Blitter uses cache, so unless a flush is inserted after an instruction there is no guarantee of final 
data reaching the memory.  

The flush is common for both the backends. Once a flush is sent command streamer stops sending 
further commands to the back-ends and back-ends ensure that when the current commands being 
processed by the back-ends are completed flush dones are sent to blitter command streamer. 

The actual commands have been listed out in a later section. 

BLT Engine State  

Most of the BLT instructions are state-free, which means that all states required to execute the command 
is within the instruction. If clipping is not used, then there is no shared state for many of the BLT 
instructions. This allows the BLT Engine to be shared by many drivers with minimal synchronization 
between the drivers. 

Instructions which share state are: 

All instructions that are X,Y commands and use the Clipping Rectangle by asserting the Clip Enable field 

All XY_Setup Commands (XY_SETUP_BLT and XY_SETUP_MONO_PATTERN_SL_BLT, XY_SETUP_CLIP_BLT) 
load the shared state for the following commands: 

XY_PIXEL_BLT (Negative Stride (=Pitch) Not Allowed) 

XY_SCANLINES_BLT  

XY_TEXT_BLT (Negative Stride (=Pitch) Not Allowed) 

XY_TEXT_IMMEDIATE_BLT (Negative Stride (=Pitch) Not Allowed) 

State registers that are saved & restored in the Logical Context: 

BR1+ Setup Control (Solid Pattern Select, Clipping Enable, Mono Source 
Transparency Mode, Mono Pattern Transparency Mode, Color Depth[1:0], 
Raster Operation[7:0], & Destination Pitch[15:0]) + 32bpp Channel 

36   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Mask[1:0], Mono / Color Pattern 

BR05 Setup Background Color 

BR06 Setup Foreground Color 

BR07 Setup Pattern Base Address 

BR09 Setup Destination Base Address 

BR20 DW0 for a Monochrome Pattern 

BR21 DW1 for a Monochrome Pattern 

BR24 ClipRectY1'X1 

BR25 ClipRectY2'X2 

The definition of each of the above registers which are part of logical context and are saved and restored 
during context save and restore are found in "BLT Engine Instruction Field Definitions" section. 

Device Cache Coherency: Render & Texture Caches 

Software must initiate cache flushes to enforce coherency between the render and texture caches, i.e., 
both the render and texture caches must be flushed before a BLT destination surface can be reused as a 
texture source. Color sources and destinations use the render cache, while patterns and monochrome 
sources use the texture cache. 

Verbatim Copy operation  

Verbatim Copy is the special copy operation defined for compressed surface copy where both the main 
surface data and the associated CCS data are moved as it is from one location to another. During this 
operation main surface data copy and CCS data copy are performed sequentially. Driver needs to use 
two separate commands, XY_FAST_COPY_BLT to copy the main surface data and 
XY_CTRL_SURF_COPY_BLT to copy the CCS surface, together for verbatim copy. In case of regular 
compressed data access from Copy Engine, read data from source is always made available to copy 
engine as fully decompressed data and Copy Engine writes fully decompressed data back to memory and 
if destination compression is required this data is again compressed and written to memory. The 
compressed write causes both CCS and main surface write data to be modified. In case of verbatim copy 
"data read" operation from source the data does not decompressed before sending to Copy Engine. 
Driver needs to set "Enable Compressed Surface Read" bit in the XY_FAST_COPY_BLT command to enable 
this special operation. In case of verbatim copy "data write" operation to destination surface this "raw" 
compressed data is sent out and this flow can be enabled by driver by setting the "Enable Compressed 
Surface Write" bit in the XY_FAST_COPY_BLT command. 

These two commands must be used in a pair and the sequence in which the two commands must be 
used during verbatim copy operation varies based on whether it is being used for swap-in (moving data 
from local memory to system memory) or swap-out (moving data from system memory to local memory) 
operation for compressed data. In case of swap-out operation the sequence required is 
XY_FAST_COPY_BLT followed by XY_CTRL_SURF_COPY_BLT. In case of swap-in operation the sequence 
required is XY_CTRL_SURF_COPY_BLT followed by XY_FAST_COPY_BLT. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   37 



    

 

During verbatim copy the copy rectangles used for XY_CTRL_SURF_COPY_BLT and XY_FAST_COPY_BLT 
must be same. They must also use same BPP and pitch. Using base address X1, X2, Y1, Y2 from 
XY_FAST_COPY_BLT command start address and range is calculated. 

BLT Engine Instructions 

The Instruction Target field is used as an opcode by the BLT Engine state machine to qualify the control 
bits that are relevant for executing the instruction. The descriptions for each DWord and bit field are 
contained in the BLT Engine Instruction Field Definition section. Each DWord field is described as a 
register, but none of these registers can be written or read through a memory mapped location; they are 
internal state only. 

BLT Programming Restrictions   

Overlapping Source/Destination BLTs: 

For all products negative pitch programming is allowed only when the source and destination surfaces 
are of the same type: linear source to linear destination copy, or tiled source to tiled destination copy. 
This is a must requirement. In such cases: 

• Both the pitches must be programmed to be a negative value, if the source and destination 
surfaces are overlapping. 

• Either of the pitches can be programmed to a negative value if required to do mirroring, but only if 
the complete source and destination surfaces are not overlapping anywhere on the surfaces. 

Description 

For the XY_FAST_COPY_BLT and XY_BLOCK_COPY_BLT instruction, these restrictions apply: 

When two sequential fast copy blits have different source surfaces, but their destinations refer to the same 
destination surface and therefore destinations overlap, a Flush must be inserted between the two blits. 

For two sequential fast copy blits when the source of the second blit is the destination of the first blit or they 
overlap a Flush must be inserted between the two blits. 

For Tiled surfaces, the pitch length is always Cacheline aligned (64-byte multiple), as Tile surface pitches must be a 
multiple of Tile widths, which are always cacheline aligned. 

For XY_FAST_COPY_BLT command (X1, X2) and (Y1, Y2) must be programmed different values so that start 
pixel/end pixel and start line/end line do not coincide. 

Legacy Blits: 

The following condition must be avoided when programming the BLT engine: Linear surfaces with a 
cache line in scan line Y for the source stream overlapping with a cache line in scan line Y-1 for the dest 
stream (=> non-aligned surface pitches). The cache coherency rules combined with the Blitter data 
consumption rules result in UNDEFINED operation. 

All reserved fields must be programmed to 0s. 

38   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

When using monosource or text data (bit/byte/word aligned): Do not program pixel widths greater than 
32,745 pixels. 

The other way to do this is driver should always program a dummy 3D. 

NON-PIPELINE state following the BLT commands: 

Description 

For Monosource and Color Pattern surfaces, and also linear color source and destination surfaces, the start Base 
Address programmed should always be Cache Line (64 byte) aligned. 

 

Programming Note 

Context: Fast Copy Blitter + Frame Buffer Compression 

Fast Copy, Block Copy and Fast Color workloads targeting the Front Buffer with FBC enabled is not supported. 

 

Programming Note 

Context: XY_FAST_COPY_BLT command programming restriction 

XY_FAST_COPY_BLT command's (X1, Y1), (X2, Y2) must be programmed such way so that neither W nor H of the 
surface to copy are "0". 

 

Programming Note 

Context: Blitter 

Support for Tile-Yf format has been removed, so Blitter should not be programmed to support Tile-Yf for source or 
destination tiling. 

 

Programming Note 

Project:  

Context: Blitter (XY_BLOCK_COPY_BLT, XY_FAST_COLOR_BLT commands) 

X offset, Y offset and (X1, Y1), (X2, Y2) values must be programmed so that X coordinate values when added to X 
offset remains within the surface boundary (16384 pixels). Similarly 

Y coordinate values when added to Y offset must remain within the surface boundary (16384 lines). 

Copy operation between two overlapping surfaces are supported only when the base address and pitch of both the 
source and destination surfaces are identical, irrespective of the surface formats. 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   39 



    

 

2D (XY) BLT Instructions  

Most BLT instructions (prefixed with "XY_") use 2D X,Y coordinate specifications vs. lower-level linear 
addresses These instructions also support simple 2D clipping against a clip rectangle. The top and left 
Clipping coordinates are inclusive. The bottom and right coordinates are exclusive. The BLT Engine 
performs a trivial reject for all CLIP BLT instructions before performing any accesses. 

Negative destination and source coordinates are supported. In the case of negative source coordinates, 
the destination X1 and Y1 are modified by the absolute value of the negative source coordinate before 
the destination clip checking and final drawing coordinates are calculated. The absolute value of the 
source negative coordinate is added to the corresponding destination coordinate. The BLT engine 
clipping also checks for (DX2 [ or = DX1) or (DY2 [ or = DY1) after this calculation and if true, then the 
BLT is totally rejected. 

Source and destination pitches have the additional explanation given next. The below statements are 
applicable for pitch field in all of the Blit commands: 

1. For Linear surfaces, the pitch is programmed in bytes. For Tiled surfaces the pitch programmed is 
in Dwords count. 

2. For Tiled surfaces this pitch is of 512Byte granularity for Tile-X: This means the tiled-x surface pitch 
can be (512, 1024, 1536, 2048...)/4 (in Dwords). 

3. For Tiled surfaces this pitch is of 128B granularity for Tile-Y/Yf and of 512B granularity for Tile-Ys: 
This means the tiled-y surface pitch can be (128, 256, 384, 512...)/4 (in Dwords). 

4. Another way to indicate this is, for tiled surfaces, the pitch is programmed in Dwords and is an 
integral multiple of the tile width. 

BLT Instructions 

Instructions 

XY_BLOCK_COPY_BLT 

XY_FAST_COPY_BLT 

XY_FAST_COLOR_BLT 

XY_COLOR_BLT 

XY_FULL_BLT 

XY_FULL_IMMEDIATE_PATTERN_BLT 

XY_FULL_MONO_PATTERN_BLT 

XY_FULL_MONO_PATTERN_MONO_SRC_BLT 

XY_FULL_MONO_SRC_BLT 

XY_FULL_MONO_SRC_IMMEDIATE_PATTERN_BLT 

XY_MONO_PAT_BLT 

XY_MONO_PAT_FIXED_BLT 

XY_MONO_SRC_COPY_BLT 

XY_MONO_SRC_COPY_IMMEDIATE_BLT 

XY_PAT_BLT 

XY_PAT_BLT_IMMEDIATE 

40   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

Instructions 

XY_PAT_CHROMA_BLT 

XY_PAT_CHROMA_BLT_IMMEDIATE 

XY_PIXEL_BLT 

XY_SCANLINES_BLT 

XY_SETUP_BLT 

XY_SETUP_CLIP_BLT 

XY_SETUP_MONO_PATTERN_SL_BLT 

XY_SRC_COPY_BLT 

XY_SRC_COPY_CHROMA_BLT 

XY_TEXT_BLT 

XY_TEXT_IMMEDIATE_BLT 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   41 



    

 

Some Equalities & Inequalities for Source Clipping 

 

DX1, DY1, CX1, and CY1 are inclusive, while DX2, DY2, CX2, and CY2 are exclusive. 

Destination pixel address = (Destination Base Address + (Destination Y coordinate * Destination pitch) + 
(Destination X coordinate * bytes per pixel)). 

Source pixel address = (Source Base Address + (Source Y coordinate * Source pitch) + (Source X 
coordinate * bytes per pixel)). 

Since there is 1 set of Clip Rectangle registers, the Interrupt Ring BLT commands either MUST NEVER 
enable clipping with these commands and never use the XY_Pixel_BLT, XY_Scanline_BLT, nor XY_Text_BLT 
commands or it must use context switching. The Interrupt rings can also use the non-clipped, linear 
address commands specified before this section. 

42   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21 



  
  

 

The base addresses plus the X and Y coordinates determine if there is an overlap between the source and 
destination operands. If the base addresses of the source and destination are the same and the Source 
X1 is less than Destination X1, then the BLT Engine performs the accesses in the X-backwards access 
pattern. There is no need to look for an actual overlap. If the base addresses are the same and Source Y1 
is less than Destination Y1, then the scan line accesses are performed backwards. 

 

Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21   43 



    

 

BLT Engine Instruction Field Definitions 

This section describes the BLT Engine instruction fields. These descriptions are in the format of register 
descriptions. These registers are internal and are not readable. Some of these registers are state that is 
saved and restored for supporting separate software threads. 

Register 

BR00 - BLT Opcode and Control 

BR01 - Setup BLT Raster OP, Control, and Destination Offset 

BR05 - Setup Expansion Background Color 

BR06 - Setup Expansion Foreground Color 

BR07 - Setup Blit Color Pattern Address Lower Order Address bits 

BR30 - Setup Blit Color Pattern Address Higher Order Address 

BR09 - Destination Address Lower Order Address Bits 

BR27 - Destination Address Higher Order Address 

BR11 - BLT Source Pitch (Offset) 

BR12 - Source Address Lower order Address bits 

BR28 - Source Address Higher order Address 

BR13 - BLT Raster OP, Control, and Destination Pitch 

BR14 - Destination Width and Height 

BR15 - Color Pattern Address Lower order Address bits 

BR29 - Color Pattern Address Higher order Address 

BR16 - Pattern Expansion Background and Solid Pattern Color 

BR17 - Pattern Expansion Foreground Color 

BR18 - Source Expansion Background and Destination Color 

BR19 - Source Expansion Foreground Color 

 

44   Doc Ref # IHD-OS-TGL-Vol 10-12.21